###########################################
Sending out qutebrowser and pytest stickers
###########################################

:category: webengine
:tags: pytest

Last Thursday, I sent out 68 letters to 19 countries, containing the stickers
for the pytest and qutebrowser crowdfundings!

I already had the pytest stickers for a while, and recently recieved the
qutebrowser ones as well:

.. image:: /images/stickers/stickers_1_small.jpg
   :alt: qutebrowser stickers
   :target: /images/stickers/stickers_1.jpg

.. image:: /images/stickers/stickers_2_small.jpg
   :alt: qutebrowser and pytest stickers
   :target: /images/stickers/stickers_1.jpg

As I had the data in a (somewhat messy) CSV from Indiegogo with notes added by
hand, I wrote a small `script <http://paste.the-compiler.org/view/7d4a13d1>`_
to get the data from the CSV and generate `LaTeX
<http://www.latex-project.org/>`_ via `jinja2 <http://jinja.pocoo.org/>`_,
which then gave me a nice PDF which I could use with window envelopes:

.. image:: /images/stickers/mailings_1_small.jpg
   :alt: sticker letters
   :target: /images/stickers/mailings_1.jpg

Turns out addressing international mail correctly gets really hard when you
have the address as individual parts rather than a free text field! I
special-cased the UK and US to (hopefully) match their format, and hoped
everyone else used something like "1234 City"... See the script source for
details if you're curious.

A bit later, everything was folded, and sorted by pytest/qutebrowser as well as
Switzerland/Europe/worldwide:

.. image:: /images/stickers/mailings_2_small.jpg
   :alt: sticker letters - folded
   :target: /images/stickers/mailings_2.jpg

I originally was told I could get them stamped at the post office as it was
more than 50 letters - however, it turned out that's only possible if it's more
than 50 letters *per postage value*, which wasn't the case for me... so I spent
around 120 EUR on stamps:

.. image:: /images/stickers/stamps_small.jpg
   :alt: A lot of Swiss stamps!
   :target: /images/stickers/stamps.jpg

To make things worse, on most of the letters I had to stick two stamps. At
least they were self-adhesive!

Some 20 minutes of sticking on stamps later, things were ready - I also sticked
another qutebrowser sticker on the envelope, as I have more than enough (and it
made it easier to see what's a pytest and what's a qutebrowser mailing):

.. image:: /images/stickers/mailings_3_small.jpg
   :alt: Ready to ship!
   :target: /images/stickers/mailings_3.jpg

And a bit later, they made their way into the post box:

.. image:: /images/stickers/post_small.jpg
   :alt: Post box
   :target: /images/stickers/post.jpg

Someone from the UK already told me theirs arrived, so hopefully yours will as
well! Please let me know when it does. ;)

If your pledge level also includes a t-shirt, I'll send your stickers together
with the t-shirt, which unfortunately still will take a while to arrive.
Stay tuned!
