##################
New config merged!
##################

:category: config

It's been a long time since the last post here - a new update is way overdue,
especially seeing that the new config was merged a week ago!

Apologies for the delay! After my exams and holidays were finished, I worked for
another two days full-time (plus some more) last week. Shortly after that I
wanted to write this blog post, but I was busy talking to people about their
issues with the new config, fixing a lot of little bugs, and opening issues for
everything which might take a bit longer.

For everyone wondering about my exams: They went great! It was quite annoying
that I had to pause working on qutebrowser before the new config was merged to
focus on learning, but it definitely was the right decision.

***********************
End of the crowdfunding
***********************

Unfortunately, this also means the crowdfunded time of working full-time on
qutebrowser is finished (at least for this year!). As usual, I'll work as much
as my time permits in my free time on it, though!

Also, I still haven't had the time to take care of t-shirts yet. This is
something I plan to look at mainly at weekends, to coordinate with my girlfriend
who'll recieve the package (as she's in Austria which is in the EU, and I'm
planning to ship them from Germany again. Turns out getting things over the
border from Austria to Germany is much easier than Switzerland to Germany).

Back to the good news: I've mentioned it above briefly, the new config is
finally merged! Some more details about what that means and what has happened
since the last blogpost will follow.

*************
The big merge
*************

I wanted to merge the branch as fast as possible (as pull requests against the
master branch started to pile up), but there were still some things I wanted to
do before shipping out the new config to everyone:

- Fixing some bugs which caused the testsuite to fail on the ``new-config`` branch.
- Merging the newest ``master`` with the new completion code into ``new-config``
  and resolving a lot of conflicts (thanks to Ryan Roden-Corrent / `@rcorre`_
  who did a lot of work on this!)
- Various changes to the module getting filesystem locations (such as the config
  dir) in order to move data to more correct locations on macOS and Windows.
- `Removing support`_ for ambiguous keybindings shadowing each other, and the
  related ``input.ambiguous_timeout`` setting which mostly confused people.
- `Changing`_ the JavaScript log level setting (``javascript.log``) to be able
  to map JS loglevels to different qutebrowser loglevels on QtWebEngine.
- `Implementing`_ support for a ``config.py`` file for manual configuration for advanced users.
- `Improving`_ error handling so all errors happening in ``config.py`` get
  caught properly and displayed combined if possible.
- Changing the `default behavior`_ for Up/Down in command mode to go through the
  command history, which hopefully makes that more discoverable.
- Adding a `configdiff`_ page which shows changes in the old config compared to
  the default, to make it easier to migrate. This was surprisingly easy thanks
  to Python's `difflib`_ module.
- Adding a `documentation page`_ for how to configure qutebrowser with the new config.
- Fixing a bug related to `escaping`_ HTML in various prompts, which became visible with the config errors.
- Many little bugfixes and improvements.

Here's how things looked like right before the merge:

.. code-block:: raw

   226 files changed, 13144 insertions(+), 14030 deletions(-)

Then on September 16th, I finally merged in all those changes as it was ready to
roll out to a bigger amount of people. The feedback I've gotten since then was
quite positive, but there was still a lot to do after the merge!

.. _removing support: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/1fc9817cd43fbebce7592f9bd4993c31e34f839f
.. _Changing: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/cee51df4fbdfcb7a974a4285e6a3764e070bf300
.. _Implementing: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/cb806aefa3b1a367fb6e79332504466a9e07781f
.. _Improving: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/b8fb88f4c27b348ec129cef0638d47f833567a4e
.. _default behavior: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/7c39600508004c5cb0bbde84f973209e61fec6f9
.. _configdiff: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/54c417391dbe4544eed7ecfa51aa87292826b10a
.. _difflib: https://docs.python.org/3/library/difflib.html
.. _documentation page: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/blob/master/doc/help/configuring.asciidoc
.. _escaping: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/3179e8c7b9c290bff2683efb6e0564a0301f648f

***************
After the merge
***************

With the new config finally merged, I started some additional work and of course
acted upon the feedback I got from users.

The first thing I did was adjusting a lot of code to make it possible to
initialize the config very early, before Qt's ``QApplication`` object exists.
This makes it possible to configure things like the backend to use, or what
commandline arguments to pass to QtWebEngine/Chromium. There was a bit of work
involved as Qt's functions for getting e.g. the user's config dir appends the
application name, but Qt doesn't know about that before the ``QApplication``
exists. To make this work, qutebrowser now appends the directory if it isn't
there yet, and `has a test`_ ensuring that those locations match the one Qt
would return with a QApplication. With that change, support for `migrating
data`_ written by QtWebEngine before qutebrowser v0.9.0 was also dropped, in the
hope that nobody uses it anymore.

With that done, I was finally able to add a `qt_args`_ and `backend`_ setting,
hopefully making qutebrowser wrapper scripts unnecessary!

Also, I decided it was finally time to drop support for old Qt/Python/QtWebKit
versions, like `announced`_ some while ago. This meant I could delete almost
1000 lines of code dealing with those old versions (and make other code more
readable) - and to my surprise, nobody has complained yet!

That change drops support for `Python 3.4`_, `Qt < 5.7.1`_ and `legacy
QtWebKit`_ (but not the `updated fork`_). This mainly affects Ubuntu Trusty /
Debian Jessie (where you need to get a newer Python from somewhere and install
the rest `manually`_) and Gentoo (where you need to install a Python 3.5/3.6
from "unstable" and a newer QtWebKit or QtWebEngine).

I also `introduced`_ the `attrs`_ library as a new dependency, making writing
"data classes" in Python much more easier. A lot of projects started using it
recently, as it definitely helps cutting down a lot of boilerplate code (to the
point that it's `discussed`_ whether Python should add a similar feature to its
standard library).

Then I started reviewing crash reports and pull requests I've been ignoring
because of my exams, as well as fixing lots of small bugs with the new config
(which is still `ongoing`_).

.. _has a test: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/blob/b8389e4496028fce178031fc79eee478f4d8e4c9/tests/unit/utils/test_standarddir.py#L522-L549
.. _migrating data: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/a1fa40f0679a0a365a0e33ca3a235b78f311a923
.. _qt_args: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/fe05947b54be138ef261da00eda01474fc690345
.. _backend: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/b1b6c462c1a8a30abf37c4d785e5cc9925385b31
.. _announced: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/issues/2742
.. _Python 3.4: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/505321c336408073655e33dd43f90dd327521351
.. _Qt < 5.7.1: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/852baaa8c30b84b0870b235ff69b2d376ba0613f
.. _legacy QtWebKit: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/3772dc5930e55416ac1eef0ec7a1f612bdf7d617
.. _updated fork: https://github.com/annulen/webkit/wiki
.. _manually: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/blob/master/doc/install.asciidoc#installing-qutebrowser-with-tox
.. _introduced: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/3a5241b642da666e4517a32e0eb945254d86a6da
.. _attrs: http://www.attrs.org/
.. _discussed: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0557/
.. _ongoing: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22component%3A+config%22

**********
Other work
**********

A quick overview about other things which have happened since the last post on
July 7th:

- The `new completion`_ was merged! `@rcorre`_ has been working on this for over
  a year, so we're both glad it was finally finished and merged. This means big
  speed improvements especially for the ``:open`` completion, and easier writing
  of new completions inside qutebrowser.
- ``:download`` now `uses the page title`_ as filename in some cases.
- The status bar gained a new `back/forward indicator`_.
- Messages are now `shown longer`_ if there are many of them.
- The ``PyOpenGL`` dependency was dropped by `using a simpler workaround`_ for
  OpenGL issues with QtWebEngine.
- Lots of other smaller work!

.. _new completion: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/pull/2295
.. _@rcorre: https://github.com/rcorre
.. _uses the page title: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/pull/2753
.. _back/forward indicator: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/pull/2738
.. _using a simpler workaround: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/a942613d7fea62932de3ced4008ebbb8ae190bc4
.. _shown longer: https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/pull/2808

*********
Moving on
*********

My studies started again last week, so things are going to be a bit slower again
going forward.

After the current smaller issues with the new config are fixed, the next things
I want to take care of are what's missing to finally make QtWebEngine the
default backend everywhere.

Once that's done, the last important missing bit is per-domain settings. Those
will still be some work, but now that the new config is in, it'll be much easier
to make it happen.

I'd really like to release v1.0.0 before November 14th, when Firefox 57 will be
released (dropping support for legacy addons, and thus
`Vimperator`_ and `Pentadactyl`_). I think per-domain settings are a feature
which definitely should be in v1.0.0, so I'll try my best to make it happen
until then.

.. _Vimperator: http://vimperator.org/vimperator.html
.. _Pentadactyl: http://5digits.org/pentadactyl/
