################################################################
CVE-2018-10895: Remote code execution due to CSRF in qutebrowser
################################################################

:tags: pyplanet, qtplanet
:category: releases

***********
Description
***********

Due to a CSRF vulnerability affecting the ``qute://settings`` page, it was
possible for websites to modify qutebrowser settings. Via settings like
``editor.command``, this possibly allowed websites to execute arbitrary code.

This issue has been assigned `CVE-2018-10895 <https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2018-10895>`_.

*****************
Affected versions
*****************

The issue was introduced in v1.0.0, as part of commit `ffc29ee <https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/ffc29ee>`_.

It was fixed in the v1.4.1 release, in commit `43e58ac <https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/43e58ac865ff862c2008c510fc5f7627e10b4660>`_.

All releases between v1.0.0 and v1.4.0 (inclusive) are affected.
Backported patches are available, but no additional releases are planned:

- `v1.1.x <https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/ff686ff7f395d83e5ac48507ecfae0b0e97a61ef>`_
- `v1.2.x <https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/c3361c31b370140f323e481dd455450b1e74c099>`_
- `v1.3.x <https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/c2ff32d92ba9bf40ff53498ee04a4124d4993c85>`_
- `v1.4.x <https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/22148ce488da52e8a0e01ed937c0cfdb24d34775>`_
- `master <https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/43e58ac865ff862c2008c510fc5f7627e10b4660>`_

(add .patch to the URL to get patches)

********
Timeline
********

2018-07-09: I was made aware of the original issue privately (initially
believed by the reporter to only be a DoS issue), developed a fix and contacted
the distros Openwall mailinglist to organize a disclosure date to give
distributions time to coordinate releasing of a fix.

2018-07-10: Slightly updated patch sent to the distros mailinglist.

2018-07-11: Public disclosure.

**********
Mitigation
**********

Please upgrade to v1.4.1 or apply the patches above.

Note that disabling loading of ``autoconfig.yml`` is not a suitable remedy, since
settings are still applied until the next restart.

As a workaround, it's possible to patch out the vulnerable code via a
``config.py`` file:

.. code-block:: python

    from qutebrowser.browser import qutescheme
    qutescheme._qute_settings_set = lambda url: ('text/html', '')

While there is no known exploit for this in the wild, users are advised to
check their ``autoconfig.yml`` file (located in the config folder shown in
``:version``) for any unwanted modifications.

*******
Credits
*******

Thanks to:

- toofar for reporting the initial issue.
- Allan Sandfeld Jensen (carewolf) and Jüri Valdmann (juvaldma) of The Qt
  Company for their assistance with triaging and fixing the issue.
- toofar and Jay Kamat (jgkamat) for reviewing the patch.
- Morten Linderud (Foxboron) for suggestions on how to disclose this
  properly.

*****
Links
*****

- https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/issues/4060
- https://lists.schokokeks.org/pipermail/qutebrowser-announce/2018-July/000048.html
