#################################
qutebrowser moving to Libera Chat
#################################

:tags: pyplanet, qtplanet
:category: other

This blog has been lying dormant for almost a year now, but rest assured it's
still alive. I usually don't bother posting minor release announcements here
(they can be found on the `announcement mailinglist
<https://lists.schokokeks.org/mailman/listinfo.cgi/qutebrowser-announce>`_ as
well as the `subreddit <https://www.reddit.com/r/qutebrowser/>`_),
on top of that I totally forgot writing a blog post about the v2.0.0 release...

With that out of the way, I want to announce that qutebrowser, like many other
projects, has moved its IRC chat from Freenode to
`Libera Chat`_, after a rather hostile and sudden
`takeover of Freenode <https://gist.github.com/joepie91/df80d8d36cd9d1bde46ba018af497409>`_
by `Andrew Lee <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrew_Lee_(entrepreneur)>`_ / ``rasengan``
(founder of the VPN provider Private Internet Access, and apparently
`crown prince of South Korea
<https://www.scmp.com/week-asia/people/article/2175439/no-k-drama-fresh-prince-south-korea-real-royalty-and-hes-american>`_,
or something).

I spent literally more than half my life on Freenode:

   -- NickServ: Information on The-Compiler (account The-Compiler):
   -- NickServ: Registered : Dec 30 02:21:14 2006 (14y 21w 4d ago)

and thus was quite surprised when a (now former) Freenode staffer I trust
messaged me two weeks ago. He asked me what I'd do in the hypothetical case
Freenode was being taken over, and I wasn't sure what to think. It all sounded
very far away, and I was hoping it wouldn't turn out that way.

A week later, unfortunately, the `takeover happened
<https://twitter.com/freenodestaff/status/1395046345145307140>`_. All the draft
resignation letters suddenly weren't drafts anymore, with the Freenode staff
quitting. The staff started to a new network `Libera Chat`_, and
at that point, I joined  the #qutebrowser channels there to make sure they
weren't taken over. Thankfully, another community member (`arza
<http://arza.us/>`_) had already taken care of that, all that was left for me is
to officially register the qutebrowser project there. Despite Libera `being run over
<https://libera.chat/news/one-week-of-libera-chat>`_ by new users, project
registrations and other user requests, the registration went through quickly and
smoothly. There were a couple of initial server hiccups, but it was clear those people
knew how to run a community. The same can't be said about the new Freenode
admins, unfortunately...

I didn't move yet, as I still wanted to see how this whole thing pans out. In
case people wanted to move before the channel did, I made sure to point out
"#qutebrowser on libera.chat exists" in the channel topic on Freenode.

I was planning to do the full move tomorrow. While Andrew Lee and the new
Freenode admins `continue to claim <https://freenode.net/news/for-foss>`_ that
they're doing the right thing for FOSS, their behavior speaks for itself: After
`taking over a single channel <https://www.devever.net/~hl/freenode_abuse>`_,
then retroactively `adjusting their policy
<https://github.com/freenode/web-7.0/pull/513/files>`_ accordingly, tonight this
happened:

   05:02 -> freenodecom (~com@freenode/staff) has joined #qutebrowser

   05:02 -- freenodecom has changed topic for #qutebrowser from "Current: v2.2.2 - #qutebrowser on irc.libera.chat exists, full move ~soon - [...]" to "This channel has moved to ##qutebrowser. The topic is in violation of freenode policy: https://freenode.net/policies"

   05:02 <@freenodecom> This channel has been reopened with respect to the communities and new users. The topic is in violation of freenode policy: https://freenode.net/policies

   05:02 <@freenodecom> The new channel is ##qutebrowser

   05:02 <- freenodecom (~com@freenode/staff) has left #qutebrowser

The same thing happened to many other channels, including e.g. the `channel for
the FOSDEM conference <https://twitter.com/fosdem/status/1397454352835653632>`_,
the third-largest channel on Freenode.

Of course, after the backlash they claim this was by mistake:

   06:15 -- rasengan (~rasengan@freenode/staff/rasengan): [Global Notice] In the recent policy enforcement, some channels were erroneously included. We greatly apologize for the inconvenience. Please contact us in #freenode-services or contact-us@freenode.net. Thanks for your patience and choosing freenode!   

My take on this: It **really doesn't matter** whether some additional channels
were included by mistake. Automatically closing channels (after being active
communities for years!) based on some kind of match on the topic mentioning
Libera Chat is malicious power abuse no matter how you twist it. Not only that,
it's grossly incompetent on top of that.

I originally planned to set up something like `Matterbridge`_ to bridge the
Freenode and Libera channels, so that people can move over at their own pace.
With the
#qutebrowser channel now forcibly removed by Freenode out of the blue, I'm not
going to bother reinstantiating it. Effective immediately, the IRC chat for
qutebrowser has `moved
<https://github.com/qutebrowser/qutebrowser/commit/7961cf73553847ea265a388b736fffac77dae66a>`_
to `irc.libera.chat <ircs://irc.libera.chat:6697/#qutebrowser>`_, with a
`webchat <https://kiwiirc.com/nextclient/irc.libera.chat:+6697/#qutebrowser>`_
by KiwiIRC.

I urge other projects to do the same sooner rather than later. From what it
looks like, Freenode can't be salvaged, and it's probably only going to get
worse.

I'm also planning to play with `Matterbridge`_ regardless, and see if I can maybe
bridge the IRC channel to more modern platforms like `Matrix
<https://matrix.org/>`_, `Discord <https://discord.com/>`_ or a `Telegram
<https://telegram.org/>`_ groupchat.  It'd be an interesting experiment to see
if that'd attract more/different people than an (arguably somewhat dated) IRC
channel. But let's take things one step at a time.

The sudden loss of a community I joined when I was 13 years old is saddening,
and it's crazy how quickly this all went downhill. Let's move on, to Libera
Chat!

.. _`Libera chat`: https://libera.chat
.. _`Matterbridge`: https://github.com/42wim/matterbridge
